
## CHAPTER X
### VADI, SAMVADI, ANUVADI and VIVADI NOTES

In Hindustani system of music four kinds of notes are used in a Raga, namely Vadi, Samvadi, Anuvadi and Vivadi notes. Every musician while singing a Raga has got to keep in mind the proper use of these four kinds of notes. A Raga has a fixed Vadi and a fixed Samvadi note. Leaving aside these two kinds of notes the remaining notes used in a Raga are called Anuvadi notes. The note which, as a rule, is not used in a Raga but is sometimes sparingly used for the sake of creating beauty in the Raga is called Vivadi note.

#### VADI NOTE
Vadi note is that note which is most frequently used in a Raga. It is the predominent note or the reigning note of a Raga. It is the very life-note of a Raga. Vadi note is recognised by the longest stoppage on it and by the frequent occurance of it. For example, the Vadi note of Raga Yaman is 'Ga'. The note 'Ga' is frequently used in this Raga and also frequent stoppage is made on it. For example: "`Ga, Re Sa, Ni. Re Ga, Pa Ma' Ga, Ma' Ga, Dha Pa Ma' Ga, Pa Re, Ga, Ni, Re Ga, Ga, Re, Sa.`" Here in Raga Yaman the note 'Ga' has been frequently used and also frequent stoppage has been made on it. Vadi note is considered as the very life-note of a Raga. Because the entire beauty of a Raga hinges on its Vadi note. Vadi note is commonly known as the predominent note, the main note, the life-note and the reigning note of a Raga. Vadi note is like a King or analogous to a King among of all the notes used in a Raga.

The 'Vadi' note discharges two functions. It determines the name of a Raga, i.e., whether it is a Poorvangavadi Raga or an Uttarangavadi Raga and also the approximate time when the Raga has to be sung. In order to understand the dual function of the Vadi note it should be noted that all the Ragas have been divided into two main groups, namely, 'Poorva-Raga' and 'Uttar-Raga'. Poorva-Ragas are sung between mid-day and mid-night and Uttar-Ragas are sung between mid-night and mid-day. The Ragas falling under the first group (Poorva-Ragas) have their 'Vadi' note invariably in the first part of the Octave, viz., 'Sa Re Ga Ma Pa' and are called Poorvangavadi Ragas. The Ragas falling under the second group (Uttar-Ragas) have their vadi note invariably in the second part of the Octave, viz., 'Ma Pa Dha Ni 'Sa' and are called Uttarangavadi Ragas. Thus the location of Vadi note in a Raga enables us to determine as to whether a particular Raga is a Poorvangavadi Raga or an Uttarangavadi Raga. For example, Raga Yaman has got 'Ga' as its Vadi note. And the note 'Ga' belongs to the first-part of the Octave. Thus the Vadi note determines that Raga Yaman is a Poorva-Raga or a Poorvangavadi Raga and is sung between mid-day and mid-night. Further examining the notes of Raga Yeman we find that it belongs to the group of Ragas having both 'Re' and 'Dha' sharp (Teevra) which are sung between 7 and 10 in the night. Therefore we can safely say that Raga Yaman is sung in the first quarter of the night. Hence it is clear that 'Vadi' note determines the name of the Raga, i.e., Poorvangavadi Raga or Uttarangavadi Raga as well as the time for singing the Ragas.

Vadi note has been compared to a King. Just as a King is necessary for a kingdom (may not be true these days) in the same way 'Vadi' note is indispensable for a Raga.

#### SAMVADI NOTE
That note which is used in a Raga less frequently than the Vadi note but more frequently than the other notes of the Raga, is called 'Samvadi' note. In other words, Samvadi note is next in importance to the 'Vadi' note in a Raga. For example, in Raga Yaman 'Ni' is the Samvadi note and is used less frequently than 'Ga' the Vadi note.

Samvadi note is the consonant of the Vadi note. Both the notes are co-related to each other. The Samvadi is the representative of the Vadi in the other tetrachord. There exists a certain ratio between the notes of the two halves or tetrachords of the octave thus: `Sa : Pa`, `Re : Dha`, `Ga : Ni` and `Ma : 'Sa`. In other words, the notes of the second part of the octave 'Pa Dha Ni 'Sa' are the 'Samvadi' or the fifth of the notes 'Sa Re Ga Ma' in the first part of the octave. The musical interval between the corresponding notes of the second and first tetrachords of the octave is that of one-and-a-half (1½) in each case. If 'Ga' is Vadi in a Raga, 'Ni' will be its Samvadi, or if 'Re' is Vadi in a Raga, 'Dha' will be its Samvadi. But in certain Ragas where the fifth of the 'Vadi' note is deleted from a Raga, the fourth of the Vadi note is taken as its Samvadi. For example, in Raga Bhoopali 'Ga' is Vadi and 'Dha' is Samvadi. Since 'Ni' is deleted in this Raga, therefore 'Dha' the fourth note is taken as the Samvadi of 'Ga'. Hence 'Dha' the fourth note from 'Ga' is the Samvadi note in Bhoopali.

Samvadi note has been compared to a minister. It is analogous to the minister, second in power to the king, in order to carry on the administration of the state. Just as a minister occupies an important place, next to the king, in the administration of the state, in the same way the position of Samvadi note is next in importance to the Vadi note in a Raga.

#### ANUVADI NOTE
Leaving aside the Vadi and Samvadi notes the remaining notes of a Raga are called 'Anuvadi' notes. For example, in Raga Yaman 'Ga' is the Vadi note and 'Ni' is the Samvadi note. Now the remaining notes `Re Ma' Pa Dha` are called its Anuvadi notes. The Anuvadi notes are the followers of the Vadi and Samvadi notes. They work in collaboration with the Vadi and Samvadi notes. Because the Vadi and Samvadi notes alone cannot depict a Raga. If we just sing 'Ga' and 'Ni', all alone, in Raga Yaman, it will have no meaning and will not give any impression of the Raga. Therefore, Anuvadi notes also are very important in a Raga. Anuvadi notes have been compared to the servants of the State. Just as the king and the minister alone cannot manage to carry on the administration of the state without the help of other officials, in the same way the Vadi and Samvadi notes, all alone, cannot give any impression of the Raga without the help of the 'Anuvadi' notes.

#### VIVADI NOTE
That note which, as a rule, is not used in a Raga but is sometimes sparingly used for the sake of creating beauty in the Raga, is called Vivadi note. For example, in Raga Bhairavi sometimes sharp (Teevra) 'Re' and sharp (Teevra) 'Ni' are used for creating beauty in the Raga. Similarly, in Raga Behag sometimes sharp (Teevra) 'Ma' is used for creating beauty in it. For example: `Ni Sa Ga Ma' Pa Ma' Ga Ma Ga`, or `Ni Dha Pa Ma' Ga Ma Ga`. It is, no doubt, true that Vivadi note creates beauty in a Raga. But it should be used very carefully and skilfully. If it is not used properly and skilfully, it is likely to spoil the beauty of the Raga, nay, it may create discord in it. That is why 'Vivadi' note has also been called as the enemy of a Raga. In fact, Vivadi note is not among the recognised notes of a Raga. Therefore, it should be sparingly used in a Raga and that also very skilfully and in a proper manner and at the proper place. For its improper use mars the beauty of the Raga. But its proper use is apt to enhance the beauty of the Raga.

It must be noted here that Vivadi note is not the same as the disallowed note or the omitted note (Varjit Swara) of a Raga. The Vivadi note is used to beautify a Raga, while the disallowed note (Varjit Swara) is never used in a Raga.

As already stated above the Vadi note is the king or the predominent note or the reigning note of a Raga. The Samvadi note is like a minister to the king or the note next in importance to the Vadi note. Anuvadi notes are like the servants of the king and the minister and help Vadi and Samvadi notes in singing a Raga. The Vivadi note is the enemy-note in a Raga. It produces discord. But it is sometimes sparingly used for creating beauty in the Raga.
