
## CHAPTER XVI
### Life sketches of some distinguished Musicians

#### Pt. VISHNU NARAYAN BHATKHANDE
With the dismemberment of the Mughal Empire music lost its State patronage. The Britishers did not take any interest in the preservation and progress of this sublime art. The native princes, under the spell of the new system of education they received, became indifferent to this indigenous art because of their pride in everything western. The educated classes looked it with disdain and believed that it was meant exclusively for persons belonging to the low strata of society. The art fell into the hands of illiterate professionals and lost much of its original purity. Practising musicians of those days regarded music as their hoarded treasure and were too averse to part with it. They were jealously anxious to preserve their art only among the members of their family and were extremely reluctant even to demonstrate fully their own knowledge lest it should be revealed to outsiders. With the rapidly disappearing patronage of the native princes, music had dwindled down to a few centres, and the number of good and authoritative musicians was sadly depleted. There were hardly any musicians left who had the knowledge of the theory of music or the ancient texts. The music as it was then practised had very much changed, in its form, from what it was described in the ancient Granthas. It was at this critical time, about one hundred and thirty years ago, that a peerless musical genius appeared on the stage of Indian music as its saviour. It was Pandit Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande, one of the greatest masters, composers and scholars the world has seen.

He saw the light on August 13, 1860, on Sri Krishna Janmashtami day, in a Chittapawan Brahmin family at Balkeshwar in Bombay. His father Narayan Rao alias Nana was a Munim in the employ of a rich businessman of Bombay. Nana Saheb had three sons and two daughters. Pandit Ji was the second son. His mother was a pious lady. She could sing lullaby and Bhajans very well. His father used to play on Ektara (Indian harp). His elder brother too was fond of music and used to play on Dilruba. Thus brought up amidst happy surroundings and musical environments, Pandit Ji, when yet a child, could sing the songs of his mother exactly in the same style as recited by her, though in a child-like lisping pronunciation.

In his childhood Pandit Ji was called Gajanan and his pet name was Anna. When he was barely ten, he became fond of flute. Soon he learnt to play on flute. Within a short time he mastered the Instrument so well that whenever there was any music concert in Balkeshwar or in his school, where he was receiving his education, there was an irresistible demand for his flute both as a solo performer and as an accompanist. In his school he was awarded several prizes and medals for his skilful flute playing.

He received his early education in the Elphinstone School in Bombay. He was very popular in his school. The students regarded him as their leader. Whenever there arose any quarrel among them, they would straightaway go to him, instead of making a complaint to the teacher, for the settlement of their dispute. After doing his High School he started learning Sitar. He received his lessons on Sitar from Sri Vallabhdas and Gopalgiri Bua. At first, he was required to listen to the Sitar recital of his master for months together. When his master was satisfied that the boy had a sincere desire to learn the art, he started giving him lessons on Sitar. Within a few years Panditji mastered the instrument sufficiently well and soon became a popular Sitar player of Bombay. But, despite his inordinate love for music he never neglected his academic studies and graduated in 1885. After obtaining his degree of LL.B., in 1887, he joined the bar and practised law at the High Court where he earned a creditable name within a short time.

He was married to Madhu Bai who gave birth to a daughter. But, as Providence would have it, the cruel hands of death snatched both the mother and the child from him and he was left all alone to find solace in music. Then, he joined Gyan Uttejak Mandali, a famous music circle in Bombay. Here, he learnt about 300 Dhrupads from Raoji Bua Belbagkar, a renowned Dhrupad singer. He also learnt about 150 Khyals from Ali Husain and his maternal uncle Vilayat Khan, the famous Khyal singers of that time, who were on the staff of the Mandali. During this time Panditji came in contact with a galaxy of renowned musicians of India who used to come to Bombay, from different parts of the country, to give their performances in the Mandali. He heard their performances and had discussions with them on the intricate problems of music. Thus, Panditji spent about 15 years of his life in the Mandali in learning the practice of music and in studying the ancient treatises on music. Side by side he prepared his notes on the researches that he made in the field of music and delivered a series of lectures to the benefit of the members of the Mandali.

Not content with this Panditji made up his mind to gain a thorough knowledge of both the theory and practice of music. He wanted to systematise the entire prevalent forms of music and to build on their basis a systematic and co-ordinated theory and practice of music. His aim was to standardise the existing forms of Hindustani system of music and to put them on a sound footing by formulating a set of rules that would make the knowledge of music easily accessible to all its lovers. With this end in view he decided to make a tour of the whole of India, to meet renowned musicians, to have from them a reliable knowledge of the prevailing practices and forms of Hindustani music, to collect Dhrupad and Khyal compositions and to visit well known libraries and private collections. Accordingly, at first, he visited Gujrat, Kathiawar, Surat, Baroda, Ahmadabad, Rajkot, Bikaner, Jamnagar, Junagadh, Bhavanagar etc. Next, in 1904 he went to the south and visited Madras, Tanjore, Madura, Trivendrum, Etayapuram, Bangalore etc. There, he met musicians of note, held discussions with them and gained a good knowledge of the Southern system of music. He met Subram Dixit and got the first hand information about the 72 Melakartas of Pandit Vyankatamakhi. He got the manuscripts of 'Chaturdandi Prakashika' of Vyankatamakhi, 'Swaramela Kalanidhi' of Ramamatya and 'Sangat Sara Mritam' of Tulaji Rao, which he later on caused to be published. In 1907 he went to Calcutta and met Raja S. M. Tagore who promised to cooperate with him in his efforts for the uplift of music. Next, he came in contact with Ashiq Ali and his father Mohammad Ali Kothiwal of Jaipur and learnt from them about 300 compositions of the Manarang Gharana. It was, indeed, the skilful diplomacy of Panditji which enabled him to collect as many as 300 songs from these two renowned Ustads as they were extremely reluctant to part with their 'hoarded treasure'. He composed a number of Lakshangeetas on the model of the compositions that he learnt from Mohammad Ali Kothiwal and recited them before him. This pleased the venerable Ustad very much who readily gave him further valuable Chijas (songs).

Then he visited Jabalpur, Allahabad, Banaras, Mathura, Agra, Delhi, Lucknow, Udaipur and Jaipur. At Udaipur he met Zakiruddin Khan and Allah Bande Khan the renowned traditional Dhrupad Singers. He patiently listened to their performances and was very much impressed by their unique style of Alapa-singing. He spent quite some time in Gwalior, Baroda and Rampur. At Gwalior, he collected standard compositions of Gwalior Gharana. At Rampur, he collected some very important Dhrupad compositions of Tansen from Wazir Khan and prince Saadat Ali Khan.

Thus, having equipped himself with a thorough knowledge of all the ancient Granthas on music and the prevailing forms of Hindustani music, both as regards its theory and practice, and with all the impressions and the experiences which he gained during his musical tours, he embarked upon systematising the whole on a scientific and sound basis supported by a rational, well-reasoned and easily understandable theory having due regard to its nucleus found in ancient texts. At first, he published the book called 'Swara Malika' containing set note-compositions of all the Ragas. In 1910 he published an authoritative treatise on the theory of music, in Sanskrit Slokas, entitled 'Shri Mal-Lakshya Sangeetam' describing all the Ragas of Hindustani system of music in terms of 12 Shuddha and Vikrit notes. He expounded the theory of ten Thatas (Parent modes) and classified all the current Ragas under them and accepted 'Bilawal' as the Shuddha Scale or the foundation Scale of Hindustani music. Next, he published his 'Lakshangeeta Sangraha', in three parts, containing compositions descriptive of the Ragas giving their characteristics in songs, specially composed by him for the first time. These 'Lakshangeetas' are a sort of definition songs describing briefly the properties of the Ragas in which they are composed and are of great help to the students of music in remembering the main characteristics of the Ragas through this medium. Then, he published 'Hindustani Sangeet Paddhati', in four parts, in Marathi. It is a detailed study and discussion of the theory of music explaining 150 Ragas of Hindustani music. Next, he published the famous 'Kramik Pustak Malika' in six parts. It is a detailed text-book of Hindustani music containing about 1200 well-known traditional compositions of all the important Ragas which he learnt and collected from the renowned musicians of different Gharanas. This is the only standard, authoritative and reliable text-book (a valuable treasure) of Hindustani music which is read with great benefit by all and sundry. Then, he published in English two important books known as 'A comparative study of the music of 15th, 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries' and 'A Historical Survey of the music of upper India'. Besides he edited and published other manuscripts like 'Raga Tarangini', 'Raga Manjari', 'Raga Tatva vibodh' etc. He introduced his own notation system which is universally acknowledged as the most suitable for the purposes of music and is faithfully followed by all.

Having done all this for the uplift of music, Panditji realised that to spread the learning of music it was essential to have music conferences and to have proper music schools and colleges teaching music in a rational and correct way. So, he took up this task in a systematic and energetic manner. In 1916, he organised the first All India Music Conference at Baroda and helped in the establishment of a Music College in Baroda. Then, with the active support of the Maharaja of Gwalior he helped in the establishment of 'Madhav Music College' in Gwalior. In 1918, he organised another All India Music Conference at Delhi. Next, in 1919, he organised the third All India Music Conference at Banaras. In 1926, he organised the fourth All India Music Conference at Lucknow which resulted in the establishment of 'Marris Music College' in Lucknow under his able guidance and with the help of the U.P. Government. He prepared detailed courses of study for all the said music institutions.

The opening ceremony of the 'Marris Music College' was performed on September 16, 1926, by Sir William Marris the then Governor of U.P. After this Panditji remained in Lucknow up to March, 1927, to supervise the working and teaching of the College. Often, he used to guide the teachers in the method of teaching music. As soon as the College began to flourish, he went back to Bombay. He used to visit the College, twice a year, to inspect its working and the method of teaching. He visited Lucknow for the last time in 1933. In that very year he had an attack of paralysis and remained confined to bed for full three years. Atlast, having devoted all his life for the cause of music, he passed away on September 14, 1936.

Pandit Bhatkhande occupies an eminent position among the galaxy of musicians of India owing to his inspiring and masterly expositions of Indian classical music. He was a great architect of the renaissance of Hindustani music. He rescued Indian music from oblivion. He gave a cohesion and brought order out of chaos in the domain of Hindustani music. He systematised it, standardised it and put it on a scientific basis and sound footing. His voluminous writings, both on the theory and practice of music, and his vast collections of musical compositions have immensely contributed to the preservation of this sublime art. He was primarily responsible for invigorating and resuscitating Indian classical music by the introduction of pleasing innovations and nuances. He was mainly instrumental in spreading mass education in music. His achievements in the field of music are epoch-making. He was a great force and inspiration in the world of music. He was a gift, a national asset and yet he was much more than this. His life itself was a piece of art. He was one of the ablest sons of India. His life was one of complete dedication to music. He was born for music, he lived for music and he died for music. His name shall ever shine bright like the pole-star in the firmament of music.

#### Dr. S. N. RATANJANKAR
Padma Bhushan Dr. Shree Krishna Narayan Ratanjankar, the most distinguished of the disciples of late Pandit Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande, was a unique figure in the world of music. He was an erudite musician of versatile genius, a top-ranking musicologist and a talented performer. His rich and flawless recitals with perfectly correct intonation have left an indelible stamp on the lovers of music of this country.

Dr. S. N. Ratanjankar was born on 31st. December, 1900, in a respectable middle class Maharashtra family of Bombay. His father late Sri Narayan Govind Ratanjankar was an officer in the C. I. D. He was very fond of music and also a good Sitarist. Dr. Ratanjankar alias 'Babu', fondly called as such by Pt. Bhatkhande, was brought up admist congenial surroundings of music. From his tenderest infancy he had an aptitude for music. His father sincerely wished his son to become an expert musician. With this end in view he engaged a music teacher for imparting him training in music. Thus, in 1907, when yet a child of seven, Ratanjankar had his first initiation in the art of music from Pandit Krishnam Bhatt, the disciple of the famous Kale Khan of Patiala Gharana. Within a few months he acquired such a mastery over 'Swara-gyan' that he could easily identify the sounds produced by the whistle of the Railway Engine, tea-pots, thali, Katori and temple-bells as 'Ga Pa Dha' etc. on the basis of the Shadja of his Tanpura. Seeing this wonderful capacity of his promising child his father put him under the training of Pt. Anant Manohar Joshi, the disciple of late Balkrishna Bua. About this time his father came into contact with Pt. Bhatkhande through Sri Shanker Karnad, a lawyer and a friend of Bhatkhande. One day, Shanker Rao and Pt. Bhatkhande happened to came to the house of Dr. Ratanjankar when he was having his lessons on music from Pt. Joshi. Pandit Bhatkhande heard his song and asked him to recite all the twelve notes of the octave one after another. Ratanjankar recited them quite correctly. Pt. Bhatkhande was very much pleased with his admirable talent for swara-gyan and blessed him with the remark, ''Beta, you are very promising, go on learning and you will earn name and fame". He also gave him a bottle of lemon drops.

In 1910 his father had to retire, on a premature pension, due to his ill health. His mother too expired. Unable to live in a costly city like Bombay the family shifted to Poona. His lessons on music had to be suspended. After a few months the family again came back to Bombay. It was in 1911 that one day his father happened to meet Pt. Bhatkhande while travelling in a tram-car. In the course of their talk his father requested Pt. Bhatkhande for his guidance to his son in regard to his further studies in music. Pt. Bhatkhande readily agreed to do so. Thus, Ratanjankar became the disciple of Pt. Bhatkhande and began to have his regular lessons on music, both in theory and practice, at the feet of his revered GURU. Along with his training in music he sincerely carried on his academic studies as well. Pt. Bhatkhande secured for him a scholarship of Rs. 40/- per month, from Baroda State, for learning music. He lived in Baroda from 1917 to 1922. During this period and with the approval of Pt. Bhatkhande he became the disciple of Aftab-e-Moosiqi Ustad Faiyaz Khan and had his regular training in music from him for full five years. Next, his family shifted to Bombay, and in 1926 he graduated from the Wilson College. He was about to join his M. A., but Pt. Bhatkhande called him to Lucknow to work as a Professor of music in the Marris College of Hindustani music, now known as Bhatkhande College of Hindustani music. In 1928 he was made the Principal of the College and remained there for over three decades, till his appointment as the first vice-Chancellor of Indira Kala Vishwavidyalaya, Khairagarh, M.P., in 1957. In the same year the President of India conferred on him the honour of Padma Bhushan as a mark of distinction for his meritorious services and distinguished contributions in the field of music.

Ever since his appointment as the Principal of Marris College of Hindustani Music, Lucknow, Dr. Ratanjankar had become the very life-blood of the institution. He was an ideal Professor and an ideal Principal. His method of teaching was excellent. Unlike most of the old and conservative Ustads, who considered their khandani compositions as their hoarded treasure and who were too averse to part with them, nay, were jealously anxious to preserve them only among the members of their family, Dr. Ratanjankar was perfectly liberal in giving his art to his pupils. It is his pupils who sometimes felt that they had learnt from him more than they could digest. The high status and reputation enjoyed by the Institution is a standing testimony to the valuable work done by him. Thousands of his distinguished pupils scattered all over India are his living monuments. He had a great enthusiasm for work and an ardent love for his students. Although short and slim in stature, he possessed a dignified and commanding personality and was loved by one and all. He was of simple habits and was not infrequently found engrossed in musical thoughts. He was a performer of the first rank and was second to none in rendering the Ragas in enchantingly flawless style. His music was perfectly sweet and dignified combined with aesthetic purity and creativeness. His style was basically of Jaipur Gharana but bore the stamp of ustad Faiyaz Khan's style at the same time retained a remarkable individuality of its own. He was capable of rendering even rare Ragas with equal case and grace. Most of the musicians have a few Ragas as their favourite ones and render them with remarkable skill. On the other hand, Dr. Ratanjankar had full command over all the Ragas and could render them with perfect ease and fluency, strictly maintaining their fine spirit and correct form. Herein, he was unique and peerless.

Musicologists praise him for his profound scholarship in the science of music. The articles and papers contributed by him to journals and music conferences and his talks given from the Lucknow and Delhi Radio Stations on various topics of music bear the stamp of his scholarship. It was, indeed, a pleasure to listen to his speeches and expositions during music conferences. He was also a composer of no mean repute. To his credit, he composed about 200 songs in rare Ragas which he got them published in his 'Abhinava Geet Manjari in two parts. Besides, he published his 'Tan Sangraha' in three parts, 'Varnamala', Govardhan-uddhar' (an opera) etc. which are his valuable contributions to music. He had a keen eye for the beauties of Karnataka music and freely adopted the current compositions and Ragas of the south in Hindustani music. He composed several 'varnams' and 'kritis' of the South in Sanskrit and Karnataka style for the benefit of the students of North Indian music. He composed new Ragas and combinations like Marg-Behag, Kedar-Bahar, Sawani-Kedar, Salag-Varari, Rajani-Kalyan which are very popular even to this day.

My first contact with Dr. Ratanjankar was in 1934, when I approached him for seeking my admission to the college. His first question was to ask me to sing some thing in the way of testing me. I sang the song 'Barajori Nahi Re Kanhai' etc. in Raga Bhairavi. He was satisfied and I was duly admitted to the college. When I took my 'Sangeet Visharad' and secured highest marks in theory, he asked me to hold theory classes in the college, and I started doing so very obediently. I shall ever remain grateful to him for his kind guidance to me in music. Whenever there was any intricate problem, either in theory or practical, I atonce approached him and he very kindly gave me his valuable guidance. Even when he used to be in Bombay, I would write to him about my problems and he always solved them through his kind letters to me. When I submitted the Manuscript of my book 'Sangee Koumudi' before him, in 1940, he was very much pleased and advised me to write further for the benefit of the students of all the classes. And, by his kind blessings, I completed all the four parts of my book within a year. In fact, he was my best guide and an ideal Guru. Now I feel lonely. Alas! where will I go now to have my problems solved.

Dr. Ratanjankar was one of the ablest sons of India. The like of him will not be born again. Infact, Bombay should be proud of having produced such an erudite musician and scholar. He was a gift, a national asset and yet he was more than this. His valuable services in the domain of music are unique and beyond description. He was a rare gem in the firmament of music. His passing away is an irreparable loss to the world of music.

I offer my most revered tribute to him and pray the Almighty that his soul may rest in peace in heaven.